New Thread
Press Enter to send, Shift + Enter for new line
Your message:
2026-02-22-postgame-commentary-pipeline-plan-CONTEXT.md
2026-02-22-postgame-commentary-pipeline-plan.md
Assistant Reply:

I'll provide a thorough critical review of this implementation plan based on the context documents provided.
Review: Post-Game Replay Commentary Pipeline Implementation Plan
1. One-Line Verdict

A well-researched, methodologically sound plan that appropriately extends existing infrastructure, but carrying unnecessary complexity in the two-stage LLM architecture for the expected 8-15 turn game lengths, and with fragile dependencies on markdown text parsing that could silently degrade.
2. What's Good

Architecture Decisions:

    Two-stage LLM pipeline (analysis → narrative) is justified by production research (WSC Sports, IBM Wimbledon) and academic survey findings. The split between structured analysis and free-form narrative is the right abstraction layer.
    Claude Haiku 4.5 as default with Sonnet opt-in is the correct cost-quality trade-off for a solo developer with a small community audience.
    Structured output for Stage 1 (analysis) ensures parseable intermediates; free-form for Stage 2 avoids mechanical-sounding prose. This distinction is well-reasoned.
    Few-shot examples drawn from actual manually-written commentaries (not generic examples) will dramatically improve style matching — this is the highest-value component of the pipeline.

Infrastructure Leverage:

    Extending generate_commentary_data.py rather than rewriting is the right call. The 690-line tool already handles the hard stuff (replay fetch, C++ subprocess, resource validation).
    Following the proven Batch API pattern from discord_knowledge_extractor.py (submission, polling, checkpointing) reduces risk significantly.
    Intermediate file caching (analysis_{CODE}.json, data_{CODE}.json) enables prompt iteration without expensive re-extraction.

Risk Mitigation:

    Programmatic verification pass catches the most common hallucination types (invented turn numbers, non-existent units, wrong eval values).
    --validate-only and --eval-only modes provide fallback paths when C++ is unavailable.
    Cost tracking printed after each run creates accountability.

3. Concerns & Risks
Critical (High Severity)

3.1. Two-stage architecture may be overkill for typical game lengths

The plan targets Prismata games that are 8-40 turns (most common: 12-18 turns). For a 15-turn game producing 4-5 Discord messages:

    Two LLM calls at ~$0.02/game = $0.04 total
    Single call at ~$0.02/game
    Quality difference for a 15-turn game may not justify 2x cost and ~5s additional latency

The research cited (WSC Sports, academic surveys) applies to sports broadcasting with hours of footage to process. For a 15-turn card game, the input data is structurally much simpler.

Mitigation: Add a --short-game threshold (e.g., games under 10 turns use single-pass) or make the two-stage opt-in via --quality high.

3.2. Unit knowledge extraction via text search is fragile

The plan proposes: "Simple text search for unit name headers in the KB files, extract the paragraph(s)."

This is brittle:

    If someone changes "### Plasmafier" to "#### Plasmafier" (adds a heading level), the search breaks silently
    If unit names appear in multiple sections (e.g., Plasmafier mentioned in both its own section AND in a strategy guide), you get the wrong content
    No schema validation — you might extract garbage and not know until the LLM produces bad output

Mitigation: Convert unit knowledge to a JSON/YAML lookup table at build time, or use proper markdown parsing with heading-based section extraction.
Major (Medium Severity)

3.3. Verification pass may miss strategic hallucination claims

The plan checks:

    Turn numbers exist
    Unit names in deck
    Eval values match (±2%)

But the LLM could produce false strategic claims that aren't catchable by programmatic verification:

    "Player X should have defended on turn 7" (subjective, unverifiable)
    "This was a greedy build" (interpretation, not fact)
    "Yotsu is known for aggressive openings" (assertion about player style)

If the goal is "quality matching manually-written examples," these are exactly the kinds of claims that make commentary engaging — but the verification pass can't catch when they're wrong.

Mitigation: Either accept this limitation (human review final arbiter) or add a second cheap LLM call for "fact-check the strategic claims against game data."

3.4. Inconsistent token budget across phases

Phase 2 (Analysis): "~4K in, ~2K out"
Phase 3 (Narrative): "~6K in, ~3K out"

But Phase 2c Anti-pattern Guard says: "Use only the condensed game rules (~1,200 tokens) + unit-specific knowledge"

This is contradictory. If analysis input is only ~1,200 tokens game rules + unit knowledge (~500 tokens) = ~1,700 tokens, not 4K. If it's supposed to be 4K, what else is included?

Clarification needed: The plan should specify exactly what's in each stage's input context (system prompt, game rules, unit knowledge, few-shot examples, per-turn data).

3.5. No retry/state management for partial pipeline failure

What happens if:

    Phase 1 (data extraction) succeeds
    Stage 1 (analysis) succeeds
    Stage 2 (narrative) fails due to API error?

Currently: The analysis JSON is saved (analysis_{CODE}.json) but there's no mechanism to retry just Stage 2 from the saved analysis. You'd have to re-run the whole pipeline.

Mitigation: Add --resume-stage2 flag that reads existing analysis JSON and runs narrative only.
Minor (Low Severity)

3.6. Few-shot example selection is over-engineered for 3 examples

The plan says:

    "Use the shortest high-quality example... If the game is long (>20 rounds), also include... If the game involves an upset..."

With only 3 existing commentaries, this selection logic is essentially hardcoded. Dynamic selection becomes trivial:

    If rating diff > 200: use the upset example
    Else: use the shorter example

This is fine, but the complexity of the selection criteria implies there's more variety than actually exists. Should note that selection logic will expand as more commentaries are manually written.
4. Suggested Changes
Change 1: Add short-game optimization

Location: Phase 3 (Narrative Generation Stage), possibly Phase 2

Change: Add logic to detect games under ~10 turns and use a simplified single-pass approach:

    Skip analysis stage entirely
    Use a single narrative call with condensed game data + few-shot examples
    Reduces cost from ~$0.02 to ~$0.01, latency from ~15s to ~8s

Rationale: The overhead of two LLM calls isn't justified for short games where there's less "analysis" to do.
Change 2: Build unit knowledge at build time, not runtime

Location: Phase 1 (Data extraction)

Change: Instead of text-searching markdown at runtime, create a JSON lookup table (tools/data/unit_knowledge.json) once:
json

{
  "Plasmafier": "Drone-eating attack engine. Click sacrifices Drone for 4 burst attack...",
  "Tesla Coil": "Chill unit. Freezes 1 enemy blocker per turn..."
}

Populate this from the markdown files once (manual or scripted), then the JSON lookup is instant and deterministic.

Rationale: Runtime text parsing of markdown is error-prone. A JSON schema is validated, testable, and versionable.
Change 3: Make Stage 2 retryable from saved analysis

Location: Phase 4 (End-to-end CLI)

Change: Add --resume-stage2 CODE flag that:

    Reads existing analysis_{CODE}.json
    Runs narrative stage only
    Saves to commentary_{CODE}.txt

This enables prompt iteration without re-running expensive data extraction or analysis.

Rationale: In practice, most iteration will be on the narrative prompt, not the analysis.
Change 4: Specify exact input token budgets

Location: Phase 2 and Phase 3 descriptions

Change: Explicitly document what's in each LLM call:
Component	Analysis Stage	Narrative Stage
System prompt (cached)	~1,200 tokens game rules	~800 tokens style guide
Unit knowledge	~500 tokens (varies by set)	~300 tokens (subset)
Per-turn data	Full JSON (~2,500 tokens)	Analysis JSON (~1,500 tokens)
Few-shot examples	None	1-2 examples (~3,500 tokens)
Total	~4,200 tokens	~6,100 tokens

This eliminates the contradiction between the token estimates and the "1,200 tokens" mentioned in anti-pattern guards.
5. Alternatives

Alternative 1: Single-pass with better prompting

Instead of two LLM calls, use a single call with:

    Explicit instruction: "First analyze the game in JSON format, then write commentary based on that analysis"
    The model does both internally, we parse both from one response

Pros: Half the cost, less latency, simpler orchestration
Cons: More complex prompt, harder to debug when analysis is wrong, less modular

Given the small scale (solo developer, small community), this might be the pragmatic choice.

Alternative 2: Sonnet for analysis, Haiku for narrative

Use Sonnet 4.5 ($0.03/call) for analysis (where reasoning quality matters more) and Haiku ($0.01/call) for narrative (where the heavy lifting is done by few-shot examples).

Pros: Better analysis without full Sonnet cost
Cons: More complex model selection logic, marginal savings

Alternative 3: Three-stage with set reading

Add a pre-analysis stage: "Given this random set, what are the dominant strategies?"

Pros: Matches how expert players actually approach the game
Cons: Over-engineering for 15-turn games; the random set analysis can be inline in the analysis prompt
6. Additions

Addition 1: Error handling specification

The plan should explicitly specify how to handle:

    C++ subprocess timeout or crash (already covered by existing --eval-only fallback, but make it explicit)
    LLM API rate limiting (exponential backoff, max retries)
    Partial pipeline failure (save state, enable resume)
    Malformed output from LLM (structured output helps, but still possible)

Addition 2: Token budget monitoring

Before each LLM call, log:

    Estimated tokens (count characters / 4 as rough proxy)
    Estimated cost
    Whether prompt caching will apply

This creates visibility into what's actually being sent to the API.

Addition 3: Quality baseline comparison

Add to Phase 6 (Quality Assurance): a script that compares automated output against the 3 manually-written examples using:

    Factual accuracy (programmatic)
    Structural similarity (MESSAGE delimiters, message count, turn references)
    Length/complexity matching

This gives an objective baseline for "quality parity."
7. Removals

Removal 1: Dynamic few-shot selection complexity

The selection logic in Phase 3a ("Use the shortest... If the game is long... If the game involves an upset...") is over-engineered for 3 examples. Simplify to:

    Upset (rating diff > 200): use upset example
    Otherwise: use shorter example
    If game > 20 rounds and not an upset: add longer example

Document that this will evolve as more manual commentaries are written.

Removal 2: Prompt caching optimization for sync mode

Phase 5c describes structuring prompts for cache efficiency with cache_control: {"type": "ephemeral"}. This is appropriate for batch, but for single-game sync mode, the cache hit rate will be low (each game has different unit knowledge). Don't over-optimize caching for sync — focus on getting batch mode right first.
8. Minor / Nits

    Phase 4 CLI example: The --think-time 50 flag is not explained elsewhere. What does it do?

    File naming convention: The plan mentions commentary_FxCfR-K49T+.txt but replay code + is converted to _PLUS_ for filenames elsewhere in the codebase. Verify this consistency.

    Phase 5d checkpoint file: bin/commentary/batch_status.json is mentioned but should be bin/commentary/batch_status.json (not bin/).

    Cost tracking accuracy: The plan says "compare to API dashboard" but doesn't explain how to get the exact cost. The anthropic SDK returns usage in the response — this should be captured.

    Phase 6 A/B tool: The --compare flag is a nice-to-have but adds complexity. Consider deferring to Phase 2 (iteration after initial implementation).

9. Assumptions You're Making

    Existing code structure: I'm assuming tools/generate_commentary_data.py is importable as a module and doesn't have side effects at import time. The plan notes this as an anti-pattern guard, so you should verify.

    C++ subprocess reliability: I'm assuming --eval and --analyze modes output stable JSON that can be parsed reliably. If the C++ output format has edge cases (very long games, unusual units), this could break Phase 1.

    Replay JSON structure: I'm assuming the replay JSON from S3 has the fields the plan expects (mergedDeck, commandList, clicksPerTurn, player ratings). If Lunarch changes the replay format, this could break.

    Knowledge base completeness: I'm assuming the 5,090-line KB has entries for all possible random set units. If a new unit is added to the game but not the KB, the unit knowledge lookup will silently fail (return nothing or wrong content).

    API key availability: I'm assuming ANTHROPIC_API_KEY is set in the environment and has sufficient quota for development/testing.

Summary

The plan is well-researched and appropriately leverages existing infrastructure. The two-stage LLM architecture is justified by production systems but may be overkill for typical 15-turn Prismata games. The biggest risks are:

    Fragile unit knowledge extraction (text search of markdown)
    Over-engineering for the small scale (3 examples, small community)
    Verification pass can't catch strategic hallucination claims

Recommended priority:

    Build the JSON unit knowledge lookup (Change 2) — eliminates silent failures
    Start with single-pass for short games (Change 1) — reduces cost/complexity
    Add Stage 2 retry (Change 3) — enables rapid iteration
    Then implement full two-stage

The plan is good to proceed with these adjustments.
MiniMax M2.5
28.60 tok/sec
4252 tokens
Time-to-First: 11 sec
