Machine Learning State Evaluation in Prismata
Anonymous
Abstract—Strategy games are a unique and interesting testbed
for AI protocols due their complex rules and large state and
action spaces. Recent work in game AI has shown that strong,
robust AI agents can be created by combining existing techniques
of deep learning and heuristic search. Heuristic search techniques
typically make use of an evaluation function to judge the value
of a game state, however these functions have historically been
hand-coded by game experts. Recent results have shown that it
is possible to use modern deep learning techniques to learn these
evaluation functions, bypassing the need for expert knowledge.
In this paper, we explore the implementation of this idea in Pris-
mata, an online strategy game by Lunarch Studios. By generating
game trace training data with existing state-of-the-art AI agents,
we are able to learn a more accurate evaluation function which
when combined with the existing Prismata Hierarchical Portfolio
Search system, produces a new AI agent which is able to defeat
the previously strongest agents.
I. Introduction
Developing sophisticated AI for computer strategy games
has historically presented many interesting challenges due to
the complexity in their decision making. These games often
have state and action spaces which rival and frequently exceed
that of their strategy board-game ancestors, such as Chess
and GO. The amount of possible actions available in strategy
games may be so large that classic tree search strategies and
even state-of-the-art techniques such as Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) cannot be used in real time.
Lunarch Studio’s turn-based strategy game Prismata imple-
ments a search technique called Hierarchical Portfolio Search
(HPS), which reduces the action space of Prismata in an eﬀort
to mitigate the deﬁciencies of other searching algorithms. Even
with the action space reduction, HPS is unable to search the
entirety of the remaining tree and, as such, needs to perform
an evaluation procedure on non-terminal leaf nodes which
will be encountered at the end of a search. The process of
evaluating leaf nodes, called state evaluation, was initially
done using a hard-coded heuristic, but this heuristic was time-
consuming to construct. It was found that a technique known as
symmetric playout, which involved conducting games between
players with identical policies from leaf nodes, produced better
results than the hard-coded heuristic but developing players to
perform these playouts was also a time-consuming process.
In this paper, in an eﬀort to improve state evaluation
in Prismata, we present a machine learning solution where,
instead of playing out a full game from leaf node states,
we perform inference on a neural network trained on data
from games between the strongest available players. We test
this approach against other advanced Prismata AI agents by
entering them into a round-robin tournament and assigning
them a score based on their win-rate. We conclude with a few
possibilites for future research directions.
II. Prismata
A. Game Description
Prismata is a strategy game developed by Lunarch Studios
which combines "concepts from real-time strategy games,
collectible card games, and table-top strategy games". Before
the name Prismata was given to the game, its internal working
title was MCDS, which stood for: “Magic the Gathering,
Chess, Dominion, StarCraft"’, the four games which inspired
its creation and from which its gameplay elements are bor-
rowed. Before we discuss any AI system for Prismata, it is
ﬁrst necessary to understand its basic game rules and game
theoretic properties. A more detailed description of the game
theoretic properties of Prismata can be found in [1], with the
full game rules available on the oﬃcial Prismata website1.
Prismata is a Two Player, Deterministic, Alternating Move
game with Perfect Information. While Prismata does have
some single player puzzle content, its main competitive form
of play is one vs. one, in which players alternate taking turns
with their opponent until the game is over, similar to traditional
board games such as Chess or Checkers. Games can be played
with or without a time limit, however unlike Chess the time
limit is applied to individual turns instead of the full game.
If the time limit expires for a given turn, instead of a game
loss, the turn is simply passed immediately to the opponent.
Players in Prismata each control a number of units, with each
unit having a speciﬁc type such as a Drone or an Engineer,
similar to most popular RTS games such as StarCraft which
has unit types such as Marine or Zergling. Also similar to
RTS, players start the game with a few economic units which
can produce resources for the player. These resources in turn
can be spent on purchasing additional units which come in
one of 3 main ﬂavors: economic units (produce resources),
aggressive units (can attack), or defensive units (can block
incoming attack). The possible outcomes in Prismata are win,
loss, or draw. Victory is achieved by destroying all of the units
of the opposing player. Both players have access to all of the
game information at all times, with all units and resources
owned by both players being globally visible. There are no
mechanics such as decks, hands, or "fog of war" to conceal
the information of any player in the game.
Each turn of Prismata consists of a player performing a
number of individual Actions, with a player’s turn ending
when they choose to stop acting and pass the turn (or if
their turn timer expires). These player actions can be one
of the following: purchase a unit of a given type, activate
a unit ability, assigning incoming damage to a defending
unit, assigning own damage to an enemy unit, or ending the
current turn. Turns in Prismata are further broken down into
1http://www.prismata/net
Fig. 1: A sample opening state for a game of Prismata.
an ordered series of game phases in which only actions of a
certain type can be performed: 1) defense phase - damage is
assigned to defenders, 2) action phase - abilities of units are
activated, 3) buy phase - new units are purchased, 4) breach
phase - damage is assigned to enemy units. These phases are
similar to other strategy games such as Magic: the Gathering’s
untap, upkeep, attack, and main phases, etc. A turn in Prismata
therefore consists of an ordered sequence of individual actions,
which in this paper we will call a Move. Each player has their
own pool of resources in Prismata, which are produced by
unit actions. There are 6 resource types in Prismata: gold,
energy, red, blue, green, and attack, which players can use in
a variety of ways to perform actions such as the consumption
of resources in order to purchase additional units or activate
unit abilities.
A screenshot of the beginning state of a game of Prismata
can be seen in Figure 1. In this image, Player 1’s units on the
bottom half of of the game screen, with Player 2’s units on
the top half of the screen. A shared pool of buyable unit types
is visible on the left hand side of the screen, with currently
purchasable units highlighted in green. Each player’s resources
are visible at the far edge of their side of the screen. To activate
the ability of a given unit, it is clicked with the mouse cursor.
All actions can be undone (eﬀects reversed) by clicking a
second time on the same game element.
Combat in Prismata consists of two main steps: Attacking
and Blocking. Unlike games like Hearthstone, units do not
speciﬁcally attack other units, instead a unit generates an
amount of attack which is summed with all other attacking
units into a single attack amount. Any amount of Attack
generated by units during a player’s turn must be assigned
by the enemy to their defensive units (blocked) during the
Defense phase of their next turn. When a defensive player
chooses a blocker with h health to defend against a incoming
attack: if a ≥h the blocking unit is destroyed and the process
repeats with a −h remaining attack. If a = 0 or a < h the
blocking unit lives and the defense phase is complete. If a
player generates more attack than their opponent can block,
then all enemy blockers are destroyed and the attacking player
enters the Breach phase where remaining damage is assigned
to enemy units of the attacker’s choosing.
The main strategic decision making in Prismata involves
Defense
Ability
Buy
Breach
Min Cost Loss
Attack All
Buy Bttack
Breach Cost
Save Attackers
Leave Block
Buy Defense
Breach Attack
Do Not Attack
Buy Econ
TABLE I: A sample portfolio for Prismata
deciding which units to purchase, and then how to most
eﬀectively perform combat with those units. The task of the
AI system for Prismata is therefore do decide on the best move
(ordered sequence of actions) to perform for any given turn.
III. Prismata AI System
In this section we will introduce the AI challenges in
Prismata, as well as introduce the existing AI system in
Prismata which is based on a heuristic search technique known
as Hierarchical Portfolio Search.
A. AI Challenges
Players in Prismata start with just a few units, and quickly
grow armies that consist of dozens of units and resources by
the middle and late game stages. Since a state of the game
can consists of almost any conceivable combination of these
units and resources, the state space of Prismata is exponentially
large with respect to the number of purchasable units in the
game. A conservative lower bound of 1074 possible states
was calculated for Prismata [1], with a much higher number
being much more realistic. In addition to this, a player turn in
Prismata consists of an ordered sequence of actions, leading to
a similarly exponential number of possible moves for a player
on any given turn. These exponential state and action spaces
pose challenges for existing search algorithms, which was
why the Hierarchical Portfolio Search algorithm was created
speciﬁcally for the Prismata AI engine, and is explained in the
following section.
B. Hierarchical Portfolio Search
Hierarchical Portfolio Search (HPS) [1] is a heuristic search
algorithm that forms the basis of Prismata’s existing AI
system, and was designed speciﬁcally to tackle searching in
environments with exponentially large action spaces. The main
contribution of HPS is that it signiﬁcantly reduces the action
space of the problem by searching only over smaller subsets
of actions which are created via a Portfolio. This Portfolio is
a collection of sub-algorithms created by AI programmers or
designers, which each tackle speciﬁc sub-problems within the
game. An example Portfolio can be seen in Table I - since
a turn in Prismata is broken down into 4 unique phases, the
portfolio consists of sub-algorithms (called Partial Players) of
varying complexity which are capable of making decisions for
each of these phases. For example, the defense phase portion
of the Portfolio has an exhaustive search which attempts to
minimize the number of attackers lost when defending, the
buy phase contains a greedy knapsack solver which attempts to
purchase the most attacking units given a number of available
resources, while the ability phase has a script which simply
attacks with all available units.
2
Algorithm 1 Hierarchical Portfolio Search
1: procedure HPS(State s, Portfolio p)
2:
return NegaMax(s,p,maxDepth)
3: procedure GenerateChildren(State s, Portfolio p)
4:
m[] ←∅
5:
for all move phases f in s do
6:
m[f] ←∅
7:
for PartialPlayers pp in p[f] do
8:
m[f].add(pp(s))
9:
moves[] ←crossProduct(m[f] : move phase f)
10:
return ApplyMovesToState(moves,s
11: procedure NegaMax(State s, Portfolio p, Depth d)
12:
if (D == 0) or s.isTerminal() then
13:
return Eval(s) ←state evaluation
14:
children[] ←GenerateChildren(s,p)
15:
bestVal ←−∞
16:
for all c in children do
17:
val ←−NegaMax(c,p,d-1)
18:
bestVal ←max(bestVal,val)
19:
return bestVal
Once the portfolio has been formed, the turn moves are gen-
erated by simply taking all possible permutations of the actions
decided by the partial players in the portfolio. In the example
in Table I, this would result in a total of 2×3×3×2 = 36 total
moves. This process is shown in the GenerateChildren function
on line 3 of Algorithm 1. The ﬁnal step of HPS is to then apply
a high-level search algorithm of your choosing (Minimax,
MCTS, etc) to the moves generated by the portfolio. The
full HPS algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1, with NegaMax
chosen as the search algorithm for its compact description. The
Prismata AI’s implementation uses Alpha Beta as its search
algorithm, which is functionally identical to NegaMax.
C. State Evaluation
As with all challenging environments, the state space of
Prismata is far too large for the game tree to be exhaustively
searched, and therefore we need some method of evaluating
non-terminal lead nodes in our search algorithm. If we had an
oracle that could determine the winner of a game from any
given state then we would only need to search to depth 1 to
determine the optimal action, however this is obviously not the
case, and so we need to devise some custom function which
can evaluate a state. Decades of AI research has shown that
more accurate heuristic evaluation functions produce stronger
the overall AI agents [2], so the construction of this function
is vitally important to the strength of the AI. The call to
the evaluation function in HPS can be seen on line 13 of
Algorithm 1, for which any method of evaluating a state of
Prismata can be used - as long as it returns a larger positive
number for states which beneﬁt the player to move, and a larger
negative number for states which beneﬁt the enemy player.
Throughout the history of games AI research, these eval-
uation functions have been mostly hand-coded by domain
experts using knowledge of what may or may not be important
to a given game state. For example, early Chess evaluations
involved heuristics such as assigning point values to piece
types and board positions, and then summing those values for
a given player. The original heuristic used for the Prismata AI
system was similar to this - the resource values for each unit
owned by each player were summed, and the player resource
sum diﬀerence was calculated, with the player having the
highest sum being viewed as in a favorable position. This type
of evaluation however is ﬂawed, as it fails to take into account
the strategic position that those units may be in - an incredibly
important part of the equation that is left out.
After experimental testing, a better method of evaluation
for Prismata was found: game playouts. A simple scripted
AI agent was constructed (called a Playout Player) and was
used to evaluate a state. From a given state, both players were
controlled by the same playout player until the end of the game,
with the intuitive notion that if the same policy controlled both
players, then the resulting winner was probably in a favorable
position. This method then returns a value for who won the
playout game: 1 if the player to move won, -1 if the enemy
player won, or 0 if the game was a draw. Even though this
method of evaluation was approximately 100x slower than the
previous formula-based evaluation, resulting in fewer nodes
searched by HPS - the heuristic evaluation was so much
more accurate that the resulting player was stronger, winning
more than 65% of games with identical search time limits. In
many games, this delicate balance between the speed of the
evaluation function and its prediction accuracy plays a vital
role in overall playing strength, and the overall eﬀectiveness
of the evaluation function can only be measured by playing
the AI agents against each other with similar decision time
limits.
In the past few years, several world-class game AI agents
have been created which have made use of machine learning
techniques for evaluating game states. For example, the Deep-
Stack [3] and AlphaGo [4] systems were able to use deep
neural networks to predict the value of a state in the games of
Poker and Go, respectively. In the following sections, we will
discuss the main contribution of this paper: using deep neural
networks to learn to predict the values of Prismata states, and
using this to construct an AI agent which is stronger than the
current system.
IV. Learning State Evaluation
In this section we will discuss how we learned a state
evaluation model for Prismata. We will discuss the overall
learning objectives we want to accomplish, the methods used
for gathering the training data, the techniques and models used
to do the learning, the state representation used to encode the
Prismata states, as well as the implementation details of all
methods involved.
A. Learning Objectives
Our objective in learning a game state evaluation is to
construct a model which can predict the value of any given
input state. In our case, the value of a state is correlated to who
the winner of the game should be if both players play optimally
3
from that state until the end of the game. For simplicity, we
will deﬁne the output for our model to be a single real-valued
number in the range [-1, 1]. We want our model to predict the
value of 1 for a state which should be a deﬁnite win for the
current player of a state, the value of -1 for a state which is a
deﬁnite loss for the current player (win for the enemy), and a
value of 0 to a state which is a deﬁnite draw.
Learning state evaluation has advantages and disadvantages
over the evaluation techniques discussed previously. The main
advantages of learned prediction are: 1) learning can occur
automatically without the need to speciﬁcally construct eval-
uation functions or playout player scripts, and 2) theoretically
one can learn to predict a much stronger evaluation than hand-
coded methods if enough quality training data is given. The
main disadvantages are: 1) if the game is changed (rules or
unit properties modiﬁed in any way) then we may have to re-
train our models from scratch, and 2) learning requires access
to vast amounts of high quality training data, as we cannot
learn to predict anything more accurately than the samples we
are given to learn from.
B. Data Gathering
The previously listed disadvantage of obtaining high quality
training data poses a unique problem for complex games. Un-
like traditional supervised learning tasks such as classiﬁcation,
in which we are typically given access to data sets of inputs
along with their correctly labeled ground-truth outputs, it is
diﬃcult to obtain who the absolute winner should be from a
given state of a complex game. After all, if we were able
to determine the true winner from a given state, then the
AI task of creating a strong agent would have already been
solved. Therefore, the best that we can do is create a model
to predict the outcome of a game played by the best known
players available at any given time.
Historically, when performing initial supervised learning
experiments, game AI researchers have turned to human game
replay data as the benchmark for strong input data - with
the outcomes of those games as the target output values. For
example, Google DeepMind initially learned on human replay
data for both its AlphaGo and AlphaStar[5] AI systems - since
at the time of initial learning, human players had a far greater
skill level than existing AI systems for those games. The same
is also true for Prismata - expert human players can easily
defeat the current AI even on its hardest diﬃculty settings.
Therefore, our best option for learning would be to use these
expert human replays for our training data, however we ﬁrst
need to determine: 1) if they are available for use, and 2)
whether there are enough games to train the models.
Prismata saves every game ever played by human players,
with approximately 3 million total replays currently existing.
This number however is deceptive, as Prismata undergoes
regular game balance patches every few months with major
changes to unit properties. Learning to predict game outcomes
on replays which contain units with diﬀerent properties than
the current version of the game could yield results which are
no longer accurate. For example, certain actions which could
be performed on an older patch such as purchasing a unit for a
given number of a resources may no longer even be legal with
the same number of resources on the current patch. Another
factor limiting the usability of these replays is the rank of
the players in the game. Since we would only want to use
replays of high ranked players, this would cut approximately
60-80% of the replays from the data set as not being of high
enough quality to use for training. On top of this, there is also
a technical reason why these human replays could not be used
for the training data in this paper: the format in which they are
recorded. In order to save storage space, Prismata replays are
not stored as a sequence of game state descriptions, but are
instead stored as an ordered sequence of player actions. Each
action is of the format (TimeCode, PlayerID, ActionTypeID,
TargetID), where the TargetID indicates the unique instance
id of a unit in the game, which is assigned by the game
engine based on some complex internal rules. When a player
views a replay in the oﬃcial game client, the client is able
to simulate these actions from the beginning of the game to
recreate a game state and display it for the user. Unfortunately,
this process of recreating the game state by the oﬃcial game
engine is not usable by us in a manner that would allow for
these game states to be written to a ﬁle to be used as a training
data set, and the construction of such a system would be well
outside the scope of this publication. Based on all of these
factors, the human replays cannot be used as a training set at
this time.
Since it is not practical to train a model based on the best
available human replays, we instead train a model using the
best available AI players. By playing an AI agent against itself,
we can generate as many game state traces as are required, with
the learning target being the eventual winner of that game.
The AI agents used for the generation of the test data are
agents that currently exist in the Prismata AI engine, namely:
ExpertAI and Master Bot. Both of these agents use an Alpha
Beta search implementation of HPS with a symmetric playout
state evaluation, with the diﬀerence being that ExpertAI does
a ﬁxed depth-1 search, while Master Bot searches as many
nodes as it can in a 3 second iterative-deepening Alpha Beta
search. The main idea here is that the current playout player
used by Master Bot is a simple scripted agent, meant to be fast
enough to be used by the heuristic evaluation within a search.
If we can learn to predict the outcome of a Master Bot game
for a given state, then we can eﬀectively replace the playout
player evaluation by a learned Master Bot evaluation, resulting
in a much stronger evaluation function, which hopefully leads
to a better overall agent. We can leave these AI agents to play
against themselves and generate game traces for as long as we
want, providing ample data for learning.
C. Learning Method
In recent years, the vast majority of machine learning
breakthroughs in AI for games have come through the use
of Deep Neural Networks (DNN). AlphaGo, AlphaGo Zero2,
AlphaStar, DeepStack, and OpenAI Five3 each make use of
DNNs in their learning. Therefore, we have chosen to use
2https://deepmind.com/research/alphago/
3https://openai.com/ﬁve/
4
DNNs for our supervised learning task. The details of this
network will be given in a future section.
D. State Representation
Before we can actually learn anything, we must ﬁrst decide
on the structure of the input and output to our supervised
learning task. As we are using DNN for learning, it is advan-
tageous to devise a binary representation for our game states,
which is the preferred input format for successful learning in
most modern DNNs. It remains for us now to create a function
which given a game state, translates it into a binary string for
input into a DNN. Also, as this data will be used as input to
a neural network, the state representation must be of uniform
length regardless of the state of the game, which may vary
considerably in number of units, resources, etc.
For many AI agents learned on games, such as those
trained by DeepMind to play Atari 2600 games, in some cases
defeating expert human players, the game was summarized
visually, using the raw pixels of the game’s graphical output.
This approach lends itself to learning with convolutional
neural networks (CNN), a popular tool in developing strong
game AI, used in research on games as complex as Starcraft
II. Unlike Atari 2600 games and Starcraft, Prismata lacks
meaningful geometry; unit placement is ﬁxed and has no eﬀect
on gameplay, and so CNNs will not be as important to use in
our task.
Several state representation were tested over the course of
this research, however describing each of them is outside the
scope of this paper. Through experimental trial and error, we
arrived at a representation which appears to be a good balance
between representing the strategic nuances of a state and the
size / complexity of the DNN required to learn on it eﬀectively.
Since we are using this network as an evaluation in a search
algorithm, the feed-forward prediction speed of the network is
of vital importance as it will be called possibly thousands of
times per search episode.
The ﬁnal representation we used for our experiments en-
codes 3 main features of the state: the current resource counts
for each player, the current unit type counts for each player,
and the current player to move in the state. This encoding
discards information such as which units may be activated,
individual unit instance properties, etc, but since the states are
all recorded at the beginning of each turn when units are not
yet activated, much of the eﬀect of this information loss is
alleviated. Our ﬁnal binary representation is as follows:
[P, U11...U1n, R11...R1m, U21...U2n, R21...R2m],
where P is the current player to move at the given state (0 or
1), UXi is the current count of unit type i for player X, and
RXi is the current count of resource i for player X. These
counts are stored as one-hot encodings of their associated
integer values with a maximum length of 40, a 1 in the index
corresponding to the count, and a 0 everywhere else.
E. Network Structure
We constructed a network with 2 hidden layers, with 512
neurons in each layer. We chose an initial learning rate of
0.00001, as opposed to the default of 0.001. Using a higher
learning rate can lead to a process called overshooting which
lessens the eﬀectiveness of training a model. To supplement
the lower learning rate, our network also uses an Adam opti-
mizer, which implements the procedures of Adaptive Gradient
Algorithm (AdaGrad) and Root Mean Square Propogation
(RMSProp), meaning that Adam will adjust the learning rate
for us, a process which has been shown to outperform other
automatic learning rate adjustment protocols.
F. Tensorﬂow and Keras
There are a variety of open-source machine learning li-
braries which we could rely on for building and training our
model and we have chosen Tensorﬂow for this project. Tensor-
ﬂow was developed by Google and has an abundance of both
oﬃcial and unoﬃcial documentation. On top of Tensorﬂow,
we are using a high-level API known as Keras which has a
python wrapper making the construction of our network very
clean from a coding perspective. Using Tensorﬂow also gives
us access to the TensorBoard visualizations, a set of useful
graphical tools for observing a model’s structure and the status
of it’s learning metrics.
G. Inference on the Trained Model
Since the Prismata AI engine is written in C++, we need
to perform inference on our trained model within that C++
system. As of writing, Keras has no oﬃcial C++ libraries,
and so we need to use additional libraries to perform the
inference with C++. Frugally Deep4 is an open-source, header
only library designed speciﬁcally for calling Keras networks
in a feed-forward capacity from C++. The downside to this
approach is that frugally deep performs all its computations on
a single-core of CPU and does not support GPU computation
at all. Unfortunately, we could not ﬁnd any way to perform
a GPU implementation of the feed-forward of our network
inside C++ with the Prismata AI engine, therefore we believe
all results could easily be improved by a signiﬁcant margin
once we overcome this hurdle.
V. Experiments and Results
A. Network Training
In order to train out network, data was generated from
500,000 games of Master Bot vs. Master Bot, with the game
settings of Base Set units + 8 random units at the start of
each game. With a typical game length of a approximately
30 turns, and one sample generated each turn of each game,
this resulted in 15,090,199 training samples for our neural net
in total. Figure 2 shows the learning of the model over time
generated in gnuplot from a csv recorded using TensorBoard5.
The grey data points represent all recorded accuracy metrics
with a line of best ﬁt drawn in red. The x-axis represents the
1000 equally time-spaced accuracy reports from TensorBoard,
with a total training time of 18 hours 41 minutes.
4https://github.com/Dobiasd/frugally-deep
5https://www.tensorﬂow.org/guide/summaries_and_tensorboard
5
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.8
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Accuracy
Time
Training Accuracy
Fig. 2: Training accuracy over time
Evaluation Method
Eval / Sec
Resource
8010
Playout
147
Learned
1766
TABLE II: Evaluations per second of each method
B. Experiment 1: Evaluation Speed
The ﬁrst experiment we performed was a simple test of the
relative speed of each of the state evaluation methods available.
Three evaluation methods were tested:
1) Resource: The hard-coded resource-based heuristic state
evaluation used in the original version of the Prismata
AI. Each resource was given a value (relative to the base
gold resource) by one of the game’s original designers
and programmers Will Ma. The evaluation for a player
was then simply the sum of the resource costs of all units
that a given player owned. If one player has a higher
resource cost sum, then they are considered to be at an
advantage by this heuristic.
2) Playout: Evaluation done by symmetric playout of the
current game state to the end of the game.
3) Learned: Our trained neural network model feed forward
prediction time.
Each evaluation model was used in a sample Alpha Beta
HPS player with a one second time limit. Table II shows the
results for how much evaluations were performed on average in
each one second turn for each evaluation. From these results
we can see that the Resoruce formula is by far the fastest
evaluation, but also probably the least accurate. The Playout
evaluation was the previous best evaluation method, but far
slower than the resource heuristic. The Learned model lies in
between these two in terms of speed, and if the accuracy is
suﬃciently high, should yield an overall stronger HPS player
than with the other evaluation methods.
Opponent
Score
Resource
0.664
Playout
0.588
TABLE III: Shown is the score of an AI agent using the
Learned evaluation function vs. agents using the Resource and
Playout evaluation methods.
C. Experiment 2: AI vs. AI
In order to evaluate the overall quality of the new learned
evaluation method, we ran a tournament of AI vs. AI games
using AI players with several diﬀerent settings. A total of 3 AI
players were tested, each using HPS with Alpha-Beta search
with a time limit of 1000ms each, each of which using one
of the evaluation methods: Resource, Playout, or Learned. In
total, 12800 games (6400 per matchup) were played, with the
resulting scores displayed in Table III. The score formula was
simply the number of wins + draws/2, such that a score of 0.5
indicates both AI agents are of similar playing strength, with
a score higher than 0.5 indicating the Learned player had a
winning average against the other player.
Table III shows the score for the Learned evaluation vs.
both the Resource evaluation and the Playout evaluation. Our
new Learned evaluation had a win rate higher than 50% vs.
the previous best evaluation methods, indicating that the new
evaluation was indeed stronger overall than the previous best.
VI. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we have introduced a neural network model
for learning to predict state evaluations in Prismata, an online
strategy game. We trained this model on game traces generated
by the existing best AI agent for the game: Master Bot, which
uses Hierarchical Portfolio Search with a playout evaluation.
By using the state evaluation model trained on these Master
Bot games, we were able to use it to replace the previous Mas-
ter Bot evaluation function, and produce an overall stronger AI
agent than had previously existed.
In the future, we have several ideas to further increase the
strength of the learned evaluation agent. First, we can continue
to make improvements to both the network topology and state
representation in order to produce a smaller, more accurate
model, which will result in both more evaluations per second,
and and overall better AI agent. Next, we believe that this
process can be iterated: now that we have a stronger AI agent
than the original Master Bot, we can train a model based
on this new agent, which should produce a better overall
evaluation function, which in turn should produce a better
agent. We feel that eventually this may yield to diminishing
returns, but it should work in the short term to produce a
stronger agent overall. Lastly, we would like to improve our
agent even further by learning of policies for the entire game of
Prismata, not limiting ourselves to mere evaluation functions.
6
References
[1] D. Churchill and M. Buro, “Hierarchical portfolio search: Prismata’s ro-
bust ai architecture for games with large search spaces,” in Proceedings of
the Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Interactive Digital Entertainment Conference,
2015.
[2] J. Schaeﬀer, “The history heuristic and alpha-beta search enhancements in
practice,” Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 1203–1212, 1989.
[3] M. Moravčík, M. Schmid, N. Burch, V. Lis`y, D. Morrill, N. Bard,
T. Davis, K. Waugh, M. Johanson, and M. Bowling, “Deepstack: Expert-
level artiﬁcial intelligence in heads-up no-limit poker,” Science, vol. 356,
no. 6337, pp. 508–513, 2017.
[4] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. van den
Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam, M. Lanc-
tot, S. Dieleman, D. Grewe, J. Nham, N. Kalchbrenner, I. Sutskever,
T. Lillicrap, M. Leach, K. Kavukcuoglu, T. Graepel, and D. Hassabis,
“Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search,”
Nature, vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, jan 2016.
[5] O. Vinyals, I. Babuschkin, J. Chung, M. Mathieu, M. Jaderberg, W. M.
Czarnecki, A. Dudzik, A. Huang, P. Georgiev, R. Powell, T. Ewalds,
D. Horgan, M. Kroiss, I. Danihelka, J. Agapiou, J. Oh, V. Dalibard,
D. Choi, L. Sifre, Y. Sulsky, S. Vezhnevets, J. Molloy, T. Cai, D. Budden,
T. Paine, C. Gulcehre, Z. Wang, T. Pfaﬀ, T. Pohlen, Y. Wu, D. Yogatama,
J. Cohen, K. McKinney, O. Smith, T. Schaul, T. Lillicrap, C. Apps,
K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Hassabis, and D. Silver, “AlphaStar: Mastering
the Real-Time Strategy Game StarCraft II,” https://deepmind.com/blog/
alphastar-mastering-real-time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii/, 2019.
7
