=== Unknown paper 1 (2511.07312v1.pdf) ===
Superhuman AI for Stratego Using Self-Play
Reinforcement Learning and Test-Time Search
Samuel Sokota1, Eugene Vinitsky2, Hengyuan Hu3, J. Zico Kolter1, and
Gabriele Farina4
1Carnegie Mellon University
2NYU Tandon School of Engineering
3Stanford University
4Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Abstract
Few classical games have been regarded as such significant benchmarks of artificial intel-
ligence as to have justified training costs in the millions of dollars. Among these, Stratego—
a board wargame exemplifying the challenge of strategic decision making under massive
amounts of hidden information—stands apart as a case where such efforts failed to produce
performance at the level of top humans. This work establishes a step change in both perfor-
mance and cost for Stratego, showing that it is now possible not only to reach the level of
top humans, but to achieve vastly superhuman level—and that doing so requires not an in-
dustrial budget, but merely a few thousand dollars. We achieved this result by developing
general approaches for self-play reinforcement learning and test-time search under imperfect
information.
Stratego is a board wargame resembling military chess (see Figure 1). It is distinctive among
classical games regarded as major benchmarks of artificial intelligence (AI) in that it possesses a
massive amount of hidden information. This contrasts not only with games that have no hidden
information, like chess and Go, but also with games that have so little that AI systems can ex-
plicitly enumerate all possibilities, like Texas hold’em. The approaches that achieved superhuman
performance in these other games [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] cannot even be meaningfully applied in
settings with as much hidden information as Stratego.
Stratego also stands apart for its sheer difficulty as a benchmark. It has been the subject of
research efforts spanning multiple years, involving dozens of researchers, and culminating in the
expenditure of computational resources with commercial costs in the millions of dollars [10]. Yet,
top human players have remained superior, perhaps making it the only classical game in which
such well-resourced efforts failed to produce superhuman performance.
1
arXiv:2511.07312v1  [cs.LG]  10 Nov 2025
In this work, we introduce Ataraxos, an AI for Stratego. In a 20-game series, Ataraxos defeated
the most decorated Stratego player of all time by a margin of victory unprecedented at the highest
level of play: 15 wins, 4 draws, and 1 loss. Ataraxos achieved this result while only costing a few
thousand dollars to train.
This simultaneous step change in performance and cost was made possible by innovations in
reinforcement learning and search. The simplicity and generality of these innovations suggest
that superhuman decision-making systems may now be attainable at modest computational cost in
many strategic settings.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
💣️
Bomb
9
Gen
💣️
Bomb
💣️
Bomb
2
Sct
2
Sct
8
Col
7
Maj
5
Lt
2
Sct
7
Maj
4
Sgt
5
Lt
4
Sgt


=== Unknown paper 2 (May 2025) (2505.12109v3.pdf) ===
SAINT: Attention-Based Policies for Discrete Combinatorial Action Spaces
Matthew Landers 1 Taylor W. Killian 2 Thomas Hartvigsen 1 Afsaneh Doryab 1
Abstract
The combinatorial structure of many real-world
action spaces leads to exponential growth in the
number of possible actions, limiting the effec-
tiveness of conventional reinforcement learning
algorithms. Recent approaches for combinato-
rial action spaces impose factorized or sequential
structures over sub-actions, failing to capture com-
plex joint behavior. We introduce the Sub-Action
Interaction Network using Transformers (SAINT),
a novel policy architecture that represents multi-
component actions as unordered sets and mod-
els their dependencies via self-attention condi-
tioned on the global state. SAINT is permutation-
invariant, sample-efficient, and compatible with
standard policy optimization algorithms. In 18
distinct combinatorial environments across three
task domains, including environments with 1.35×
1018 possible actions, SAINT consistently outper-
forms strong baselines. 1
1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable suc-
cess across a range of domains, primarily through methods
designed for either small, discrete action spaces (Hessel
et al., 2018; Mnih et al., 2015; van Hasselt et al., 2015;
Mnih et al., 2016) or continuous control (Fujimoto et al.,
2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Schul-
man et al., 2017). Many real-world problems, however, in-
volve action spaces that lie between these extremes. These
large discrete combinatorial spaces are defined as Carte-
sian products of multiple subspaces, where each joint ac-
tion a = (a1, . . . , aA) consists of several coordinated sub-
actions. Such settings, which arise in critical applications
like traffic signal control (Rasheed et al., 2020) and drug
selection (Tang et al., 2022), require learning policies that
can effectively represent and reason about exponentially
1University of Virginia
2MBZUAI. Correspondence to:
Matthew Landers <qwp4pk@virginia.edu>.
Preprint. February 2, 2026.
1Code
is
available
at
https://github.com/
matthewlanders/SAINT
large, structured action spaces.
Traditional RL methods model discrete action spaces with
a flat categorical policy, but this becomes intractable in
combinatorial settings where the number of actions scales
as QA
d=1 md for A sub-action dimensions with md choices
each. To mitigate this combinatorial explosion, existing
approaches (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015; Pierrot et al., 2021;
Tavakoli et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018) rely on simplifying
assumptions that constrain the representational capacity of
the policy class. One family of methods (Tavakoli et al.,
2018; Pierrot et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2022; Beeson et al.,
2024) factorizes the policy as π(a | s) = Q
i πi(ai | s),
which cannot represent interactions between sub-actions.
Another class of approaches (Zhang et al., 2018) imposes
a fixed autoregressive order, specifying a policy class of


=== Hubert 2021 (hubert21a.pdf) ===
Learning and Planning in Complex Action Spaces
Thomas Hubert * 1 Julian Schrittwieser * 1 Ioannis Antonoglou 1 Mohammadamin Barekatain 1
Simon Schmitt 1 David Silver 1
Abstract
Many important real-world problems have action
spaces that are high-dimensional, continuous or
both, making full enumeration of all possible ac-
tions infeasible. Instead, only small subsets of
actions can be sampled for the purpose of pol-
icy evaluation and improvement. In this paper,
we propose a general framework to reason in a
principled way about policy evaluation and im-
provement over such sampled action subsets. This
sample-based policy iteration framework can in
principle be applied to any reinforcement learning
algorithm based upon policy iteration. Concretely,
we propose Sampled MuZero, an extension of
the MuZero algorithm that is able to learn in do-
mains with arbitrarily complex action spaces by
planning over sampled actions. We demonstrate
this approach on the classical board game of Go
and on two continuous control benchmark do-
mains: DeepMind Control Suite and Real-World
RL Suite.
1. Introduction
Real-world environments abound with complexity in their
action space. Physical reality is continuous both in space
and time; hence many important problems, most notably
physical control tasks, have continuous multi-dimensional
action spaces. The joints of a robotic hand can assume ar-
bitrary angles; the acceleration of a self-driving car should
vary smoothly to minimise discomfort for passengers. Dis-
crete problems also often have high-dimensional action
spaces, leading to an exponential number of possible ac-
tions. Many other domains have richly structured actions
spaces such as sentences, queries, images, or serialised ob-
jects. Consequently, a truly general reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithm must be able to deal with such complex
action spaces in order to be successfully applied to those
*Equal contribution 1DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Thomas Hubert <tkhubert@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
real-world problems.
Recent advances in deep learning and RL have indeed led
to remarkable progress in model-free RL algorithms for
continuous action spaces (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2017; Barth-Maron et al., 2018; Abdolmaleki et al.,
2018; Hoffman et al., 2020) and other complex action spaces
(Dulac-Arnold et al., 2016). Simultaneously, planning based
methods have enjoyed huge successes in domains with dis-
crete action spaces, surpassing human performance in the
classical games of chess and Go (Silver et al., 2018) or poker
(Brown & Sandholm, 2018; Moravˇc´ık et al., 2017). The
prospect of combining these two areas of research holds
great promise for real-world applications.
The model-based MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) RL
algorithm took a step towards applicability in real-world
problems by learning a model of the environment and

=== Policy improvement by planning (1088_policy_improvement_by_planning.pdf) ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
POLICY IMPROVEMENT BY PLANNING WITH GUMBEL
Ivo Danihelka1 2, Arthur Guez1, Julian Schrittwieser1, David Silver1 2
1DeepMind, London, UK
2University College London
danihelka@google.com
ABSTRACT
AlphaZero is a powerful reinforcement learning algorithm based on approximate
policy iteration and tree search. However, AlphaZero can fail to improve its policy
network, if not visiting all actions at the root of a search tree. To address this issue,
we propose a policy improvement algorithm based on sampling actions without
replacement. Furthermore, we use the idea of policy improvement to replace the
more heuristic mechanisms by which AlphaZero selects and uses actions, both at
root nodes and at non-root nodes. Our new algorithms, Gumbel AlphaZero and
Gumbel MuZero, respectively without and with model-learning, match the state
of the art on Go, chess, and Atari, and signiﬁcantly improve prior performance
when planning with few simulations.
1
INTRODUCTION
In 2018, AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2018) demonstrated a single algorithm achieving state-of-the-art
results on Go, chess, and Shogi. The community reacted quickly. Leela Chess Zero (Linscott et al.,
2018) was created to reproduce AlphaZero results on chess, winning Top Chess Engine Champi-
onship in 2019. Soon, all top-rated classical chess engines replaced traditional evaluations functions
with Efﬁciently Updatable Neural Network (Nasu, 2018).
AlphaZero was itself generalized by MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020). While AlphaZero requires
a black-box model of the environment, MuZero learns an abstract model of the environment. Essen-
tially, MuZero learns the rules of Go, chess, and Shogi from interactions with the environment. This
allows MuZero to excel also at Atari and continuous control from pixels (Hubert et al., 2021).
In this work, we redesign and improve AlphaZero. In particular, we consider the mechanisms by
which AlphaZero selects and uses actions, which are based upon a variety of heuristic ideas that
have proven especially effective in Go, chess, and Atari (Silver et al., 2018; Schrittwieser et al.,
2020). However when using a small number of simulations, some of AlphaZero’s mechanisms
perform poorly. We use the principle of policy improvement to suggest new mechanisms with a
better theoretical foundation. More speciﬁcally, we consider each mechanism in turn, alongside our
proposed modiﬁcations:
• Selecting actions to search at the root node. To explore different actions during train-
ing, AlphaZero selects actions by adding Dirichlet noise to its policy network, and then
performs a search using the perturbed policy. However, this does not ensure a policy
improvement. We instead propose to sample actions without replacement by using the
Gumbel-Top-k trick (Section 2), and perform a search using the same Gumbel values to in-
ﬂuence the selection of the best action (Section 3.3), and show that this guarantees a policy
improvement when action-value

=== Prismata GAIP3 (prismata_gaip3.pdf) ===
361
30
Hierarchical Portfolio 
Search in Prismata
David Churchill and Michael Buro
30.1 Introduction
Many unique challenges are faced when trying to write an AI system for a modern online 
strategy game. Players can control groups of tens or even hundreds of units, each with their 
own unique properties and strategies, making for a gigantic number of possible actions 
to consider at any given state of the game. Even state-of-the-art search algorithms such as 
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) are unable to cope with such large action spaces, as they 
typically require the exploration of all possible actions from a given state in a search tree. 
In addition to the difficulty of dealing with large state and action spaces, other design fea-
tures must be considered such as varying difficulty settings, robustness to game changes, 
and single player replay value.
In this chapter we will discuss the AI system designed for Prismata, the online strat-
egy game developed by Lunarch Studios. For the Prismata AI, a new algorithm called 
Hierarchical Portfolio Search (HPS) was created which reduces the action space for com-
plex strategy games, which helps deal with all of the challenges listed above. This results 
in a powerful search-based system capable of producing intelligent actions while using a 
modular design which is robust to changes in game properties.
30.1 Introduction
30.2 AI Design Goals
30.3 Prismata Gameplay 
Overview
30.4 Hierarchical Portfolio 
Search
30.5 Evaluation of HPS Playing 
Strength
30.6 Conclusion
References
362
30. Hierarchical Portfolio Search in Prismata
30.2 AI Design Goals
In addition to creating an intelligent AI system for strategy games, other design decisions 
should also be considered in order to ensure an enjoyable user experience. When design-
ing Prismata, the following design goals were laid out for the AI system: 
 •
New Player Tutorial: Strategy games often have complex rules, many different unit
types, and a variety of scenarios that the player must adjust to. All of this leads to a 
steep learning curve. Our primary goal with the Prismata AI was to aid new play-
ers as they learned to play the game, so that they would eventually become ready
to face other players on the online ladder. This required the creation of several
different difficulty settings so that players could continue to be challenged from
beginner all the way up to expert play.
 •
Single Player Replay Value: Single player missions in video games are sometimes
designed as rule-based sequences of events that players must navigate to achieve
some goal. In Prismata, that goal is to destroy all of the enemy units, which can
become quite boring if the AI does the same thing every time it encounters simi-
lar situations. Our goal was to build a dynamic AI system capable of using a vari-
ety of strategies so that it does not employ the exact same tactics each time.
 •
Robust to Change: Unlike games in the past which were finalized, shipped, and
forgotten abo

=== Churchill 2015 (aiide15_churchill_prismata.pdf) ===
Hierarchical Portfolio Search:
Prismata’s Robust AI Architecture for Games with Large Search Spaces
David Churchill and Michael Buro
University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E8, Canada
Email: dave.churchill@gmail.com,mburo@ualberta.ca
Abstract
Online strategy video games oﬀer several unique challenges
to the ﬁeld of AI research. Due to their large state and action
spaces, existing search algorithms have diﬃculties in mak-
ing strategically strong decisions. Additionally, the nature of
competitive on-line video games adds the requirement that
game designers be able to tweak game properties regularly
when strategic imbalances are found. This means that an AI
system for a game like this needs to be robust to such changes
and less reliant on expert knowledge. This paper makes two
main contributions to advancing the state of the art for AI in
modern strategy video games which have large state and ac-
tion spaces. The ﬁrst is a novel method for performing hier-
archical search using a portfolio of algorithms to reduce the
search space while maintaining strong action candidates. The
second contribution is an overall AI architecture for strategy
video games using this portfolio search method. The proposed
methods are used as the AI system for Prismata, an online
turn-based strategy game by Lunarch Studios. This system
is evaluated using three experiments: on-line play vs. human
players, oﬀ-line AI tournaments to test the relative strengths of
the AI bots, and a survey to determine user satisfaction of the
system so far. Our result show that this system achieves a skill
level in the top 25% of human players on the ranked ladder,
can be modiﬁed quickly to create diﬀerent diﬃculty settings,
is robust to changes in game unit properties, and creates an
overall AI experience which is user rated more enjoyable than
those currently found in similar video games.
Introduction
Creating AI systems for modern (video) games is compli-
cated by their decision complexity, players expecting to be
tutored about how to play and being challenged and enter-
tained as they become better players, and the high cost of
maintaining software in the presence of frequent game ad-
justments such as balancing or adding new game features.
AI programmers are therefore looking for ways to automate
decision making beyond relying solely on manually tuned be-
havior, creating AI systems that are more robust with respect
to game changes, and also making them better adjust to hu-
man players’ preferences and playing strength.
AI successes in abstract games such as Checkers (Scha-
eﬀer et al. 1996), Chess, Go, and recently heads-up limit
Poker (Bowling et al. 2015) have taught us the great value of
Copyright c⃝2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
fast look-ahead search and vast pre-computed databases stor-
ing perfect state evaluations or moves. Applying these tech-
niques to complex video games requires simpliﬁcations in
form of sta

=== Churchill 2019 (aiide2019ws_prismata.pdf) ===
Machine Learning State Evaluation in Prismata
Anonymous
Abstract—Strategy games are a unique and interesting testbed
for AI protocols due their complex rules and large state and
action spaces. Recent work in game AI has shown that strong,
robust AI agents can be created by combining existing techniques
of deep learning and heuristic search. Heuristic search techniques
typically make use of an evaluation function to judge the value
of a game state, however these functions have historically been
hand-coded by game experts. Recent results have shown that it
is possible to use modern deep learning techniques to learn these
evaluation functions, bypassing the need for expert knowledge.
In this paper, we explore the implementation of this idea in Pris-
mata, an online strategy game by Lunarch Studios. By generating
game trace training data with existing state-of-the-art AI agents,
we are able to learn a more accurate evaluation function which
when combined with the existing Prismata Hierarchical Portfolio
Search system, produces a new AI agent which is able to defeat
the previously strongest agents.
I. Introduction
Developing sophisticated AI for computer strategy games
has historically presented many interesting challenges due to
the complexity in their decision making. These games often
have state and action spaces which rival and frequently exceed
that of their strategy board-game ancestors, such as Chess
and GO. The amount of possible actions available in strategy
games may be so large that classic tree search strategies and
even state-of-the-art techniques such as Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) cannot be used in real time.
Lunarch Studio’s turn-based strategy game Prismata imple-
ments a search technique called Hierarchical Portfolio Search
(HPS), which reduces the action space of Prismata in an eﬀort
to mitigate the deﬁciencies of other searching algorithms. Even
with the action space reduction, HPS is unable to search the
entirety of the remaining tree and, as such, needs to perform
an evaluation procedure on non-terminal leaf nodes which
will be encountered at the end of a search. The process of
evaluating leaf nodes, called state evaluation, was initially
done using a hard-coded heuristic, but this heuristic was time-
consuming to construct. It was found that a technique known as
symmetric playout, which involved conducting games between
players with identical policies from leaf nodes, produced better
results than the hard-coded heuristic but developing players to
perform these playouts was also a time-consuming process.
In this paper, in an eﬀort to improve state evaluation
in Prismata, we present a machine learning solution where,
instead of playing out a full game from leaf node states,
we perform inference on a neural network trained on data
from games between the strongest available players. We test
this approach against other advanced Prismata AI agents by
entering them into a round-robin tournament and assigning
them a score based on th
